---
title: 'Mastering Blue-Green Deployments: Handling Database Migrations'
date: 2024-10-12T15:58:00-07:00
tags:
  - Django
ShowToc: true
draft: true
---

In the fast-paced world of software development, minimizing downtime during deployments is crucial. Blue-green deployments have emerged as a popular strategy to achieve this goal. However, they introduce challenges, especially when dealing with database migrations. This article delves into what blue-green deployments are, why database migrations can be tricky in this context, and how to navigate common migration scenarios effectively.

## Blue-Green Deployments

A blue-green deployment is a release management strategy that utilizes two separate production environments called "blue" and "green". At any given time, only one environment is live, serving all production traffic. Changes are deployed to the "green" environment, and after thorough testing, traffic is switched over from the "blue" to the "green" environment. This approach minimizes downtime and provides a quick rollback option by reverting traffic to the "blue" environment if issues occur.

## Database Migrations Break Blue-Green Deployments

While blue-green deployments excel at application code deployments, database migrations introduce complexity because both environments need to be compatible with the shared database. Incompatibilities between versions can lead to errors or data inconsistencies when switching traffic.

For example, suppose we want to remove the `z` field from the following Django model.

```python
class Point(models.Model):
    x = models.IntegerField()
    y = models.IntegerField()
    z = models.IntegerField()
```

If the green environment removes the field, this will break the blue environment if the blue environment relies on it. This is often the case in Django because "fetch all fields" queries in Django explicitly list the fields (e.g. `SELECT x, y, z`), instead of using `SELECT *`. So a simple `Point.objects.all()` query will break in the blue environment because the query will try to fetch the `z` field, which no longer exists.

To mitigate this, we need to use `SeparateDatabaseAndState` to remove the field in stages to ensure compatibility between the blue and green environments.

## Handling Database Migrations in Blue-Green Deployments

The [`SeparateDatabaseAndState`](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/5.1/ref/migration-operations/#django.db.migrations.operations.SeparateDatabaseAndState) migration operation allows us to separate changes to database and project state. We can use it to remove the `z` field in two backwards-compatible migrations (instead of removing it in one backwards-incompatible migration):

- Migration 1: Remove the `z` field from the green environment project state without removing it from the database
- Migration 2: Remove the `z` field from the database

### Migration 1: State changes

```python
# Generated by Django 5.0.2 on 2024-10-13 00:36

from django.db import migrations, models


class Migration(migrations.Migration):
    dependencies = [
        ("app", "0001_initial"),
    ]

    operations = [
        migrations.AlterField(
            model_name="point",
            name="z",
            field=models.IntegerField(null=True),
        ),
        migrations.SeparateDatabaseAndState(
            state_operations=[
                migrations.RemoveField(
                    model_name="point",
                    name="z",
                ),
            ],
            database_operations=[],
        ),
    ]
```

A few notes about creating and verifying the migration:

- Start by removing the `z` field from the model definition and the application code
- Create the migration by running the `makemigrations` command. Then move all backward-incompatible changes to the `state_operations` list, which is just the `RemoveField` operation in this case.
- We need to make the `z` field nullable or give it a [database default value](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/5.1/ref/models/fields/#db-default), otherwise the green environment will break when trying to insert new `Point` rows.
- Verify the migration issues the expected SQL by running the following command:

```bash
python manage.py sqlmigrate appname 0002_remove_z_field_from_state
```

- Verify the `z` field has been removed from the project state by running the following query in the Django shell:

```python
Point.objects.all().query

# Before the release:
# SELECT x, y, z FROM point

# After the release:
# SELECT x, y FROM point
```

Deploy the changes. The blue-green deployment will run the migration, spin up the green environment, switch traffic to it, and spin down the blue environment. Now our production environment is running without the `z` field.

### Migration 2: Database changes

- Start by creating an empty migration file:

```bash
python manage.py makemigrations appname --empty -n remove_z_field_from_db
```
